
Paczolay Gyula

750 magyar közmondás
750 Hungarian proverbs


1991.



A B C CS D E F G GY H I J K L LY M N NY O Ö P R S SZ T TY U V Z, ZS



A


Aki á-t mond, mondjon bé-t is.
He that says a, should also say b.
Ha adnak, vedd el, ha ütnek, szaladj el.
If something is given to you then take it, if you are beaten, then run away.
Jobb adni, mint kapni.
It is better to give than to receive.
Kétszer ad, aki gyorsan ad.
He gives twice who gives quickly.
Amilyen az adjonisten, olyan a fogadjisten.
Like greeting, on arrival, like answer.
Hátrább az agarakkal!
Backwards with the greyhounds.
'Be more modest!'
Ki mint veti ágyát, úgy alussza álmát.
As one makes his bed, so he sleeps his dream.
Ágyúval lő verebekre.
He shoots at sparrows with a high calibre gun.
Ajándék lónak ne nézd a fogát.
Do not look at the tooth of a gift horse.
Ajtóstul ront be a házba.
He rushes into the house together with the door.
'He tells/does something to somebody without announcement.'
Ha kidobják az ajtón, bemegy az ablakon.
If he is thrown out through the door, he enters through the window.
Nem amint akarnánk, hanem amint lehet.
One should act as he may, not as he would like to.
Csak akasztásra való istrángot sem érdemelne.
He would not deserve even the rope for hanging.
Kinek akasztófa helye, nem hal a Dunába.
(A bűnöst eléri méltó büntetése.)
He whose place is on the gallows, will not die in the Danube.
Akasztott ember házában kötelet emleget.
He names a rope in the house of a man that was hanged.
Alkalom szüli a tolvajt.
Opportunity bears the thief.
Felkavarta az állóvizet.
- Követ dobott az állóvízbe.
He has stirred up (or threw a stone into) still water.
'He brought motion in a quiet life.'
Nem esik messze az alma a fájától.
The apple does not fall far from its tree.
Nem vagyunk angyalok.
We are not angels.
Amilyen az anya, olyan a leánya.
Like mother, like daughter.
Nézd meg az anyját, vedd el a lányát.
Have a close look at the mother and then marry her daughter.
Ár ellen nehéz úszni.
It is difficult to swim against the stream.
Aki nem tud arabusul, ne beszéljen arabusul.
He who cannot speak Arabic, should not speak Arabic.
'He who has no knowledge/understanding of something, should not engage in (or interfere with) it.'
Az arany a sárban is arany.
Gold is gold even in the mud.
Hallgatni arany (beszélni ezüst).
To be silent is golden (to speak is silver).
Nem mind arany, ami fénylik.
All is not gold that glitters.
Ki korán kel, aranyat lel.
He who gets up early finds gold.
Nem fog aranyon a rozsda.
Rust cannot do any harm to gold.
'A man of character is resistant to temptation.'
Aranykulcs minden ajtóba beillik.
A golden key fits every door.
Nem mindig az arat, aki vet.
Not always that reaps who sows.
Ez nem az én asztalom.
This is not my table.
'This is not my duty/responsibility/concern.'
"A refusal of doing/dealing with something."
Három asszony (egy lúd, két asszony), egész vásár.
Three women (A goose and two women) make a whole fair.
Jó asszony a háznak koronája.
A good wife is the crown of the house.
Serény asszonynak rest a lánya, rest asszonynak serény a lánya.
A busy women has a lazy daughter, a lazy women has a busy daughter.
Higgy az asszonynépnek, mint az áprilisi időjárásnak.
Believe in women as in the weather in April.
Könnyű az asztag alatt/mellett kalászt szedni.
It is easy to collect ears of corn under/beside a stack.

B


Nem játszunk "add vissza a babaruhát."
We do not play 'Return the dolls clothes'.
'I do not agree to cancel a promise/agreement or to return a present given by him.'
Sok bába közt elvész a gyerek.
Among many midwives the child is lost.
Nem babra megy a játék.
The stake of the play is not beans.
'It is a serious matter.'
A bagoly is bíró barlangjában.
Even an owl is a judge in her cave.
Bagoly mondja verébnek, hogy nagyfejű.
The owl tells the sparrow that her head is big.
A baj nem jár egyedül.
Trouble does not come alone.
Mindenkinek megvan a maga baja.
Everyone his own trouble.
Ugyanazon bakot nyúzza.
(A régi nótát fújja.)
He is flaying the same bock.
(He sings the same old song.)
Mindenkit érhet baleset.
Accidents may happen to anyone.
Elcsúszott egy banánhéjon.
He has slipped on a banana-peel.
'By making a small error his secret/illegal activity came into the open.'
Késő bánat ebgondolat.
A late repentance is a dogs idea.
(After death the doctor.)
Barátot szerencse hoz, szükség próbál.
Luck brings friends, need tries them.
Mondd meg, ki a barátod megmondom ki vagy.
Tell me who your friend is, I'll tell you who you are.
Nem mind barátod, aki rád mosolyog.
All are not your friends who smile at you.
Inába szállt a bátorsága.
His courage sank to his sinews.
'He got frightened.'
Bátraké a szerencse.
Luck belongs to the brave.
A béka feneke alatt van.
It is below the bottom of a frog.
'It is of inferior quality.'
Lenyeli a békát.
He swallows the frog.
'He swallows the bitter pill.'
Hagyj békét másnak, magadra viselj gondot.
Leave others in peace, care for yourself.
Jobb a békesség.
Peace is better.
'It is better to refrain from quarrels/contradictions or raising/forcing an argument.'
Kapkod, mint Bernát a mennykőhöz.
Like Barnard, he tries to catch the 'heaven's stone' (i. e. the lightning).
He acts in confusion, inconsistently.
Nyert benne, mint Bertók a csíkban.
(Mindent elvesztett.)
He succeeded like Bertók with the loach.
'He lost everything.'
Sok beszédnek sok az alja.
In much talk there is much "bottom" (i. e. inferior matter).
A betyárból lesz a legjobb pandúr.
The former highwayman men are the best gendarmes.
Beletört a bicskája.
His (pocket)-knife was broken in it.
'He tried but failed in a achieving something.'
Kinyílik a bicska a zsebemben.
The (pocket)-knife opens in my pocket.
'Something has caused anger/despair but one was compelled to stand idly by.'
Aki bírja, marja.
He who is strongest/ablest can devour it.
'The strongest/ablest wins.'
Sorba megy, mint a falusi bíróság.
It is taken by turns like village headmanship.
Ki hol bízik, ott hízik.
Where one trusts, there he gets fat.
Magyarázza a bizonyítványát.
He explains away his report.
'He tries hard to explain or justify his action or behaviour.'
Szegénységi bizonyítványt állít ki magáról.
He issues a certificate of poverty of himself.
'He proves his incapacity.'
Bocskorbőr az orcája.
(Vastag bőr van a képén.)
There is thick sandal leather on his face.
'He is bluntly shameless.'
Mást beszél, mint Bodóné, mikor a bor árát kérik.
Like Mrs Bodó he talks about something else when asked to pay for the wine.
'Side-stepping an issue.'
Bolond lyukból bolond szél fúj.
Out of a foolish hole a foolish wind blows.
'A fool can tell only foolish things.'
Bolond ütközik kétszer egy kőbe.
A fool stumbles twice at the same stone.
Bolondnak kedvez/jár a szerencse.
Fortune favours the fool.
Egy bolond beledobja a kútba a követ, száz okos se veszi ki.
A fool may throw a stone into a well which a hundred wise cannot take out.
Egy bolond százat csinál.
One fool makes a hundred.
Bor be, ész ki.
Wine in, sense out.
Jó bornak nem kell cégér.
Good wine needs no signboard/bush.
Bámul, mint borjú az új kapura.
He stares at the new gate as a calf.
'He merely looks at something without taking action.'
Borotvaélen táncol.
He dances on a razor-edge.
'He tries to face danger from two/more sides.'
Kicsi a bors, de erős.
Pepper is small but strong.
Borsot tör valakinek az orra alá.
He crushes pepper under the nose of somebody.
'He annoys/irritates somebody.'
Falra hányt borsó.
It is like peas thrown against the wall.
'A vain effort.'
Úgy illik össze, mint bot a tegezbe.
They match as a stick in a quiver.
Minden botnak a végén a feje.
(Nyugtával dicsérd a napot.)
The "head" of each stick is at its end.
(Praise a fair day at night.)
Aki bottal köszön, annak doronggal felelnek.
He who greets with a stick, will be answered with a club.
Bottal üthetik a nyomát.
His footprints can be beaten with a stick.
'He managed to escape.'
Senki sem tud kibújni a saját bőréből.
Nobody can slip out of his own skin.
'Nobody can abandon easily his customs/ideas.'
Mindenki a maga bőrét viszi a vásárra.
Every one carries his own skin to the market (i.e. acts at his own risk).
El van maradva egy brosúrával.
He is one pamphlet behind the others.
'He still thinks/speaks/acts according to the previous guidelines.'
Nem egy nap alatt épült Buda vára.
The castle of Buda was not built in one day.
Egyszer volt Budán kutyavásár.
These was a dog-market in Buda only once.
'This favourable opportunity was a one-time occasion only.'
Felfelé bukott.
He stumbled upwards.
'After failing in a job he was moved to higher position.'

C


A cél szentesíti az eszközt.
The purpose consecrates the means.
Minden cigány a maga lovát dicséri.
Every gypsy prises his own horse.
Nem szokta a cigány a szántást.
The gypsy is not accustomed to ploughing.
'He is compelled to do something, he was previously reluctant to do.'
Még ha cigánygyerekek potyognak/esnek is az égből.
Even if gypsy children are dropped from the sky.
(Come hell or high water.)

CS


Csáky szalmájának tekinti.
He considers it as straw of the landowner Csáky.
'An expression of negligence instead of due care.'
Csalánba nem üt a ménkű/mennykő.
The sky's stone does not strike the nettle.
(Weeds don't spoil.)
Add meg a császárnak, ami a császáré, és az Istennek, ami az Istené.
Give the emperor what is the emperor's and God what is God's.
'Give everyone his due.'
Elásták a csatabárdot.
They have buried the hatchet.
Sok csepp követ váj.
Many drops hollow the stone.
Cserép, zsindely van a háztetőn/házon.
(Fiatal/gyerek van jelen, ill. "a falnak is füle van.")
There is a tile on the roof.
(Walls have ears.)
Cseréptálhoz fakanál.
To an earthenware dish a wooden spoon.
'Marry your match.'
Lehazudná a csillagokat az égről.
He would even lie, there is no star in the sky.
'He is ready to deny even the most obvious truths.'
Ha nem csinálok semmit, abból nem lehet baj.
If we do nothing (without being ordered to do) no trouble will result from it.
A sáros csizmámat sem törölném hozzá.
I would not wipe my muddy boots in him.
'An expression of utter despise.'
Hogy kerül a csizma az asztalra?
How could the boots get on the table?
'What has that got to do with it?'
'An expression of indignant surprise.'
Minden csoda három napig tart.
Every wonder lasts three days.
Ez már lerágott csont.
This is already a gnawed bone.
'A matter already discussed several times.'
Későn jövőnek csont az ebédje.
He who comes late gets bones for lunch.
Ha nem csordul/csurran, cseppen.
If it does not trickle, it will drop.
'Even if it is less than expected, still there will be something.'
Csöbörből vödörbe.
He got out of the bucket and got into the pail.
(Out of the frying into the fire.)
Kicsiny csupor hamar felforr.
A little pot quickly boils.

D


Darázsfészekbe nyúl.
He puts his hand into a wasp's nest.
Elköltené a Dárius kincsét is.
He would spend even the treasures of Darius.
Te sem vagy jobb a Deákné vásznánál.
Even you are not better than the linen of Deak's wife.
'You are as bad as the others.'
Jön még kutyára dér.
The hoar-frost is still to come for the dog.
'Be sure your sins will find you out!'
Három napig dínomdánom, holtig való szánom bánom.
A three day long merry-making and regret lasting till death.
'A hasty marriage.'
A dió törve, az asszony verve jó.
A nut is good if broken, a woman if beaten.
Hallgat, mint a süket disznó a búzában.
He keeps silent, like a deaf pig in the wheat-field.
Éhes disznó makkal álmodik.
A hungry pig dreams of acorns.
Okos disznó mély gyökeret ránt.
A clever pig extracts a deep root.
'A clever man achieves remarkable feats.'
Disznóra gyömbért ne vesztegess.
Do not waste your ginger on pigs.
Nem erőszak a disznótor.
Nobody is forced to attend the dinner given after killing a pig.
'You are free to refrain from accepting an offer I consider favourable to/for you.'
Dobbal nem lehet verebet fogni.
Sparrows cannot be caught by beating a drum.
Aki dolgozik, az nem ér rá pénzt keresni.
He who works has no time to earn money.
'If a job is hard and little paid, then one cannot earn additionally in a second job.'
Aki nem dolgozik, ne is egyék.
He that does not work, shall not eat either.
Dróton rángat valakit.
To pull somebody by a wire.
(To pull the strings.)
Két dudás egy csárdában nem fér meg.
Two pipers cannot get on in one tavern.
Akkor lészen az, mikor a Duna visszafoly vagy elszárad.
It will happen when the Danube reverts its course or dries up.
Dunát lehetne rekeszteni vele/velük.
The Danube could be dammed by them.
'There are too many of them.'

E


Nehezen alkuszik meg két eb egy csonton.
Two dogs can hardly agree on one bone.
Az ebek harmincadjára kerül/jutott.
It fell to the thirtieth of dogs.
'Although it is valuable nobody cares for it any more.'
Fogas ebnek való a csontrágás.
Gnawing on bones is for dogs having teeth.
Ha egy ebet bottal hajtanak a nyúl után, nem fogja az meg.
If a dog is driven by a stick after a hare, he will not catch it.
Köti az ebet a karóhoz.
He ties the dog to the post.
'He sticks to his position/plan/idea.'
Ebcsont beforr.
A dogs broken bone will soon be healed.
'The wound inflicted will soon be healed.'
Ég és föld a különbség (köztük).
The difference between them is like that between sky and earth.
Mint derült égből a villámcsapás.
Like a thunderstroke from a clear sky.
Az egészség ízét a betegség adja meg.
The flavour of health is given by an illness.
Szegény az eklézsia, maga harangoz a pap.
The congregation is poor, the priest rings the bell himself.
Elefánt a porcelánboltban.
An elephant in the china shop.
Nem azért élünk, hogy együnk, hanem azért eszünk, hogy éljünk.
We do not live to eat, but we eat to live.
Ki elbízza magát, könnyen megszégyenül.
He who is conceited, will easily be ashamed.
Se el ne hidd/bízd magad, se kétségbe ne essél.
Neither be conceited, nor fall into despair.
Akkor/Úgy szép az élet, ha zajlik.
Life is beautiful if it is hectic.
Az ellenségemnek se kívánom.
I do not want it even for my enemy.
Aki nincs ellenünk, az velünk van.
He who is not against us, that is with us.
Ami elmúlt, elmúlt.
What's gone, is gone.
(Don't cry over spilt milk.)
Ahány ember, annyi vélemény.
As many men as many opinions.
Az ember nem lehet elég óvatos.
One cannot be cautious enough.
Ember embernek farkasa.
Man is a wolf to man.
Ember tervez, Isten végez.
Man plans, God decides.
Holtig remél az ember.
Man hopes until his death.
Nem tudja az ember, mire virrad.
One does not know what he will find tomorrow.
Sok jó ember elfér kis helyen.
Many good people can find room in a small space.
Híres eperre nem kell kosárral menni (a közelebb lakók vagy szemfülesebbek már leszedték rég).
You do not needed a basket to pick well-known strawberries (those living nearby or being quicker have already picked them).
Nem szed más kosarába epret.
He won't pick strawberries into the basket of somebody else.
Az erdőnek füle van, a mezőnek szeme van.
The forest has an ear, the field has an eye.
Ahogy esik, úgy puffan.
As it falls so it plumps.
(As the tree falls, it will lie.)
Eső után köpönyeg.
After rain (comes) raincoat.
(After meat, mustard.)
Májusi eső aranyat ér.
A rain in May is golden.
Többet ésszel, mint erővel.
One should/could do more by wisdom than by force.
Eszi, nem eszi, nem kap mást.
He may eat it or not, he won't get anything else.
Azt se tudja, eszik-e vagy isszák.
He does not even know whether it is eaten or drunk.
'He has no idea about it.'
Sok eszkimó, kevés fóka.
Many Eskimos and few seals.
Nincs olyan hitvány eszköz, hogy hasznát ne lehetne venni.
There is no worthless thing which could not be used something.
Evés közben jön meg az étvágy.
Appetite comes while eating.
Ez van, ezt kell szeretni.
This is (what we have/experience), this is to be liked.

F


Amilyen a fa, olyan a gyümölcse.
Like tree, like fruit.
Nagy fába vágta a fejszéjét.
He cut his axe into a big tree.
(A hard venture.)
Fából vaskarika.
An iron ring made of wood.
'An absurdity.'
Kemény fából faragták.
He was carved of hard wood.
'He is strong/steadfast.'
Jó fának is van rossz gyümölcse.
Even a good tree has (sometimes) bad fruit.
A fát nem vágják ki egy csapásra/vágásra.
A tree is not felled at one stroke.
Addig hajtsd a fát, míg vessző.
Bend the tree while it is a twig.
Maga alatt vágja a fát.
He cuts the tree under himself.
Rossz fát tett a tűzre.
He has put bad wood on the fire.
(He has got into mischief.)
Nem látja a fától az erdőt.
He cannot see the wood for the trees.
Nem nőnek a fák az égig.
The trees do not grow up to the sky.
A fakónak muszáj húzni, mert a fakót is húzzák.
(Akitől az elöljárói megkövetelnek valamit, az is kénytelen követelni a beosztottaitól.)
The horse has to pull as the horse is also pulled.
'He who gets orders from his superiors, has to pass them on to his subordinates.'
A falnak is füle van.
Even the wall has an ear.
A farkas a szőrét elhányja, de a szokását nem.
The wolf may change its hair but not its nature.
(The wolf may lose his teeth, but never his nature/memory.) *
Farkast emlegetnek, a kert alatt kullog/jár.
When a wolf is mentioned, he is already walking round the garden.
Nem eszi meg a farkas/kutya a telet.
The wolf/dog does not eat the winter.
A farok csóválja a kutyát.
The tail wags the dog.
'The normal order is reversed, e. g. those give orders who are expected to obey.'
Az új fazék megtartja első szagát.
A new pot retains its first scent.
(The cask savours of the first fill.)
Minden ember az ő maga fazeka mellé szít.
(Minden szentnek maga felé hajlik a keze.)
Every man kindles the fire below his own pot.
Egy fecske nem csinál nyarat.
One swallow does not make a summer.
Akinek nincs a fejében, legyen a lábában.
He who has not (enough wit) in the head, should have (force, to replace it) in the leg.
Fején találja a szöget.
He hits the nail on the head.
Összecsapnak a feje fölött a hullámok.
The waves dash over his head.
'He is unable to cope with the situation any longer.'
Lehajtott fejet nem éri a kard.
A bent head is not touched by the sword.
Nem jó fejjel menni/rohanni a falnak.
There is no point in running one's head against the wall.
Veszett fejsze nyele.
The helve of the lost hatchet.
'A little gain in a great loss.'
Jobb félni, mint megijedni.
It is better to fear (something) than to get frightened.
Jobb félútról visszatérni, mint rossz útra térni.
Better to return from half-way than to take a wrong road.
Hadd hulljon a férgese.
Let the wormy of it drop off.
'Let those perish/leave who are not up to the standard.'
Jobb a sűrű fillér, mint a ritka forint.
It is better to get fillérs often than forints seldom.
Amíg nekünk csak fizetgetnek, addig mi is csak dolgozgatunk.
Until we are only poorly paid, we shall also poorly work.
Akinek a foga fáj, tartsa a nyelvét rajta.
(Segíts magadon.)
He who has a toothache, should keep/hold his tongue on it.
'Help yourself.'
Feni a fogát valamire.
He whets his teeth on something.
'He is very eager to get something.'
Kimutatja a foga fehérjét.
He shows the whiteness of his teeth.
(He shows himself in his true colours.)
Fogjuk meg és vigyétek.
Let us take it (into our hands) and then you carry it!
'Somebody is urging others to work without wishing to take part in it.'
Ott szakad a fonal/madzag/kötél, ahol a legvékonyabb.
The thread/string/rope breaks where it is thinnest.
Elment Földvárra deszkát árulni (meghalt).
He left for Földvár to sell boards.
'He died.'
Amit főztél, edd is meg!
What you have cooked, you should eat as well.
'You have to take the responsibility for your action.'
Szégyen a futás, de hasznos.
Running away is a shame, but it is useful.
Egyik fülén be, a másikon ki.
In at one ear and out at the other.
Se füle, se farka.
It has neither an ear, nor a tail.
(It has neither rhyme nor reason.)
'It makes no sense.'
Ahol füst van, ott tűz is van.
Where there is smoke, there is fire.
Füstbe ment.
It went into smoke.
'Nothing was realised/achieved.'
Nagyobb a füstje, mint a lángja.
Its smoke is bigger than the flame.
'It is not so serious.'

* Pótolva Paczolay Gyula: "European Proverbs in 55 Languages with Equivalents in Arabic, Persian, Sanskrit, Chinese and Japanese." (Veszprem, 1997.) c. könyve alapján


G


Senkinek sem repül szájába a sült galamb.
A roast pigeon will not fly into one's mouth.
Ahol sok a gazda, bolond a szolga.
Where there are many masters the servant becomes mad.
Az okos gazda a kárt is jóra fordítja.
A clever master turns even a loss into a gain.
Gazda nélkül csinálja a számítást.
He reckons without his host.
Gazda szeme hizlalja a jószágot.
The master's eye makes the animals fat.
Elkapta a gépszíj.
He was snatched by the belt.
'He could not resist the temptation of well-being in return for yielding from strict moral standards.'
Mással kapartatja ki a gesztenyét a tűzből/parázsból.
He makes someone else get he chestnut from the fire (glowing embers).
A gombhoz varrja a kabátot.
He sews the jacket to the button.
'Something is made after having a negligible part of if only.'
Gúzsba kötve táncol.
He danced bound hand and foot.
'He tries hard but has very little freedom of movement or action.'

GY


Gyakorlat teszi a mestert.
Practice makes the master.
Gyáva népnek nincs hazája.
Coward people have no country (of their own).
Gyermek, részeg, bolond mondják az igazat.
A child, a drunkard and a fool tell the truth.
Meghalt a gyermek, oda a komaság.
The child is dead the godfathership has ended.
Kisgyerek - kis gond, nagy gyerek - nagy gond.
Small child - small trouble, big child - big trouble.
Nem kell a gyereket a fürdővízzel kiönteni.
One need not throw out the child with the bath-water.
Néma gyereknek az anyja sem érti a szavát.
Even the mother cannot understand the words of a dumb child.
Tiltott gyümölcs édesebb.
Forbidden fruit is sweeter.

H


Nincs a hadban semmi Péter bátya.
"Szolgálatban a rokonság/ismeretség nem számít."
In the army there is no Uncle Peter.
Hosszú haj, rövid ész.
Long hair, short wit.
A süllyedő hajót elhagyják a patkányok.
Rats desert a sinking ship.
Egy hajóban eveznek.
They are rowing in the same ship.
(They are in then same boat.)
A nagy hal megeszi a kis halat.
The big fish eats the little fish.
Fejétől bűzlik a hal.
Fish stinks from the head on.
Halál ellen nincs orvosság.
There is no medicine against death.
Jó volna halálnak.
He would be good for death.
'He always arrives late.'
Sokat hallj, láss, keveset szólj.
Hear and see much, say little.
Amiről hallgatunk, az nincs is.
What we keep silence about, does not exist.
A hallgatás beleegyezés.
Silence (means) consent.
Nem lesz belőle énekes halott.
There will be no "funeral with songs" out of this/it.
'This effort will end in failure.'
Úgy kellett/hiányzott ez, mint ablakos/üveges tótnak a hanyattesés.
It was needed as a Slovak glazier needed falling on his back.
'A most unwanted event.'
A harag rossz tanácsadó.
Anger is a bad counsellor.
A mai haragod halaszd holnapra.
Postpone today's anger till tomorrow.
Nem zörög a haraszt, ha nem fúj a szél.
The dry leaves do not rustle if no wind blows.
(No smoke without fire.)
Három a magyar igazság.
The Hungarian justice is three.
'E. g. One should drink three times.'
Addig hántsd a hársat/hársfát, míg hámlik.
(Addig üsd a vasat, míg meleg.)
Peel (the inner bark of) the lime tree until it peels.
(Strike the iron while it is hot.)
Üres hasnak nem elég a szép szó.
Fair words are not enough to an empty belly.
Akkor lássam, amikor a hátam közepét.
I wish to see him when I see the middle of my back (i. e. never).
A határ a csillagos ég.
The limits is the starlit sky.
'There is no limit (e. g. in setting some prices).'
Mindennek van határa.
There is a limit to everything.
Ahány ház, annyi szokás.
So many houses, so many customs.
Amit a ház ellop, elő is adja.
What was stolen by the house, will be returned by it.
'Something mislaid somewhere will be found later.'
Sok ház ég belül, de nem látszik kívül.
Many homes burn inside but it is not seen outside.
Az én házam az én váram.
My house is my castle.
Mindenki a maga háza előtt söpörjön.
Each should sweep before his own house.
Háztűznézőbe megy.
He goes to see fire in the house.
'A visit to the home of a future wife.'
Aki hazudik, az lop is.
He that lies also steals.
Aki egyszer hazudni mer, többet hitelt nem érdemel.
He who once ventures to lie, deserves no more confidence.
Úgy hazudik, mintha könyvből olvasná.
He lies as if he read from a book.
A hazugot hamarabb utolérik, mint a sánta kutyát.
A liar is caught sooner than a lame dog.
Akkor se hisznek a hazugnak, mikor igazat mond.
A liar is not believed even if he tells the truth.
Hegy heggyel nem találkozik, de ember emberrel igen.
Mountain does not meet mountain but man does meet man.
Csak az nem követ el hibát, aki nem dolgozik.
Only those make no errors, who do not work at all.
Vannak még hibák.
There are still (some) errors.
'An answer to a complaint. It implies the refusal of the search for the reasons of the errors.'
A rossz hír szárnyon jár, a jó alig kullog.
Bad news proceeds by wings, good news hardly walks.
Aki könnyen hisz, könnyen csalatkozik.
He who readily believes, will be readily disappointed.
Hol van már a tavalyi hó?
Where is by now the snow of last year?
'This is already past history (or out of date)!'
Tele van a hócipője.
His snow-boots are full.
(He is fed up with the matter.)
A hóhért akasztják.
The hangman is being hanged.
'Somebody has to undergo the same treatment he usually gives others.'
Holló a hollónak nem vájja ki a szemét.
A raven does not pick out raven's eye.
Ki tudja, mit hoz a holnap.
Who knows what tomorrow will bring.
A holtakról vagy jót vagy semmit.
Speak praises or nothing of the dead.
Egyszer hopp, másszor kopp.
Hopp (i. e. wasting) at one time, kopp (hunger, want) at another.
Üres hordó jobban kong.
An empty barrel sounds better.
Olcsó húsnak híg a leve.
Cheap meat yields dilute soup.
(Good cheap is dear.)

I


Az idő eljár, senkire nem vár.
Time passes, it waits for nobody.
Az idő pénz.
Time is money.
Aki időt nyer, életet nyer.
He who gains time, gains life.
Mindennek megvan a maga ideje.
Everything has its time.
Mondj/szólj igazat, betörik a fejed.
Tell the truth and your head will be broken.
Borban az igazság.
In wine there is truth.
Az igazságot nem lehet véka alá rejteni.
Truth cannot be hid under a bushel.
Aki sokat ígér, keveset ad.
He who promises much, gives (but) little.
Az ígéret szép szó, ha megtartják úgy jó.
A promise is a nice word, if kept, then it is all right.
Ígéretekkel tele a padlás.
"Elegem van az ígéretekből."
The garret is full of promises.
'I am fed up with promises.'
Ami téged nem illet, ne törd azon a fejedet.
Make no headache (for yourself) of what is not your business.
Csak az imádság tartja benne a lelket.
The soul is retained in it only by the prayer.
'It is close to its end/destruction.'
Akinek nem inge, ne vegye magára.
If it is not one's shirt, one should not put it on.
'If a critical remark does not concern somebody, then it should be disregarded.'
Ingednek se higgy.
Do not trust even your own shirt.
Ha nincs íred és szelencéd, miért teszed magad borbéllyá?
"Nem vállalkozhatunk valamire, ha a hozzá szükségesekkel nem rendelkezünk."
Having no ointment and box why do you pose as hairdresser?
"Do not undertake something you are not equipped for."
Jobb száz irigy, mint egy szánó.
You'd better have one hundred who envy you than one who is sorry for you.
Akinek az Isten hivatalt ad, észt is ad (vagy észt nem ad) hozzá.
To whom God gives an office, adds also (or does not add) senses to it.
Akinek Isten valamit ad, ember el nem veheti.
What was given by God to one, cannot be taken away by man.
Az Isten/Krisztus urunk is kitért a részeg ember elől.
Even God/Christ our Lord has given way to a drunken man.
Az Isten se tehet mindennek eleget.
Even God cannot satisfy everyone.
Az Isten sem siet, sem késik.
God neither hurries, nor is late.
Felvitte az Isten a dolgát.
God has taken him to a high position.
'He got into well-being or a high position.'
Isten malmai lassan őrölnek, de biztosan.
The mills of God grind slowly, but surely.
Isten nem ver bottal.
God does not beat one with a stick.
Megfogta az Isten lábát.
He has caught the leg of God.
'His actions have led him into a very favourable position.'
Nem ismer se Istent, se embert.
He respects neither God, nor man.
Segíts magadon, az Isten is megsegít.
Help yourself and the God will also help you.
Olyan hosszú, mint a Szent Iván éneke.
It is long as the songs of St. John's day. (Midsummer day's song.)
Ízlések és pofonok különbözők.
Tastes and slaps are different.
(Tastes differ.)

J


A jég hátán is megél.
He can live even on flat ice.
(He can get money in desert.)
A jó elnyeri méltó büntetését.
He who is good, gets his deserved punishment.
'A good deed often does not get its due reward or is even followed by punishment by those who dislike it.'
Minden jó, ha a vége jó.
All is well if the end is well.
Mindenütt jó, de legjobb otthon.
It is good everywhere, but it is the best at home.
Minden jóban van valami rossz.
In every good thing there is something bad.
Jóból is megárt a sok.
Even of a good thing too much is harmful.
Amit jókedvvel teszel, nem esik nehezedre.
Anything done willingly is not hard/difficult to do.
Minden úgy van jól, ahogy van.
Everything is good as it is.
Ne csak tudd a jót, hanem tedd is.
You should not only know what is right but also do it.
Jótett helyébe jót ne várj.
Do not expect good in return for a good deed.
Jótett helyébe jót várj.
Expect good in return for a good deed.
Ha jöttök, lesztek, ha hoztok, esztek.
If you come, you will be (here), if you bring (food), you will eat.
Jöjjön, aminek jönni kell.
Let it come, whatever must come.
'I can/will not do anything to influence the course of events.'
Amit szabad Jupiternek, nem szabad azt az ökörnek.
What Jove may do, the ox may not.

K


Kabátügye van - Kabátügybe keveredett.
He has (or is involved in) a coat-affair.
'A man whose coat was stolen was told 'to be involved in a coat-stealing affair'.'
A káder nem vész el, csak átalakul.
A cadre will not be lost, only transformed.
'A cadre who failed in a position, will not be sacked, only transferred to another similar post.'
(A standard practice in the past.)
A kákán is csomót keres.
He seeks a knot even on the (bal)rush.
Minden kakas úr a maga szemétdombján.
Every cock is master upon his own dunghill.
Nem lehet mindent egy kalap alá venni.
One cannot put everything under one that.
'One cannot consider things/ideas identical/equal which are in fact different.'
Kinek milyen kalapja van, olyannal köszön.
Everyone greets others with a hat he has got.
Üres kalász fenn tartja a fejét.
An empty ear (of corn) holds its "head" upright.
Üres kamrának bolond a gazdasszonya.
An empty pantry has a fool housewife.
Megfojtaná egy kanál vízben.
He would drown him in a spoonful of water.
Minden lében kanál.
He is a spoon in all liquids.
(He has a finger in every pie.)
Egy kaptafára húz mindent.
He draws everything to one (to the same) last.
Nincs az a kár, mely valakinek ne használna.
There is no loss, which is not a gain for somebody.
Fekete karácsony, fehér húsvét.
Black Christmas white Easter.
Ha rövid a kardod, toldd meg egy lépéssel.
If your sword is short, add one step to it.
'A missing part may be substituted sometimes by something else, e.g. skill.'
Két éles kard/tőr nem fér meg egy hüvelyben.
Two sharp swords/daggers cannot be is one sheath.
Megy, mint a karikacsapás.
It goes like cuts of a whip.
(It goes like clockwork.)
Nyílt/nyitott kártyákkal játszik.
He plays with open cards.
Kinek egyszer megégette száját a kása, az aludttejet is megfújja.
He whose mouth was once burned by hot mush, blows even at sour milk.
Nem eszik a kását/levest olyan forrón, ahogy főzik.
Mush/Soup is not eaten as hot as it is cooked.
(The devil is not so black as he is painted.)
Könnyű Katit táncba vinni (ha ő is akarja).
It's easy to take Kati to the dance (if she is also willing).
Kazalban tűt keres.
He looks for a needle in a bundle (of hay).
A kecske is jóllakik és a káposzta is megmarad.
Both the goat has enough to eat and the cabbage remains.
A kecske se menne a vásárra, ha nem hajtanák.
Without driving even a goat would not go to the market.
A vén kecske is megnyalja a sót.
Even on old goat likes to lick salt.
'Even old men like making love.'
Úgy szereti, mint a kecske a kést.
He likes it as a goat likes the knife (that kills him).
Kecskére bízza a káposztát.
He confides the cabbage to the goat.
Iszik, mint a kefekötő.
He drinks like a brushmaker.
(He drinks like a fish.)
Összeköti a kellemest a hasznossal.
He combines the pleasant with the useful.
Felírjuk a kéménybe korommal.
We shall write it in soot in the chimney.
'We may write it off.'
Kenyértörésre került a dolog.
The developments have led to the breaking of bread (i. e. the breaking of former relations).
Amilyen a kérdés, olyan a felelet.
Like question, like answer.
Jobb kétszer kérdezni, mint egyszer hibázni.
It is better to ask twice than to err once.
A kerék is jobban forog, ha kenik.
The wheel turns better if greased.
Aki keres, talál.
He that seeks, finds.
Leszedi róla keresztvizet.
He removes the baptismal water from somebody.
(He curses somebody up and down.)
Ami késik, nem múlik.
What is delayed may come/happen later.
Késő sütve.
(Eső után köpönyeg.)
It was baked/fried too late.
'It was done too late.'
Jobb későn, mint soha.
Better late than never.
Megtanítlak kesztyűbe dudálni.
I shall teach you to pipe into gloves.
'I shall tech you how to behave.'
Kéz kezet mos.
One hand washes the other.
Nem tudja a jobb kéz, mit csinál a bal.
The right hand does not know what the left is doing.
'An uncoordinated or careless action.'
Sok kéz hamar kész.
Many hands are quickly ready (with the work).
Mossa a kezét.
He washes his hand.
Jó kezdet fél siker.
A good beginning is half success.
Minden kezdet nehéz.
Every beginning is hard.
A kibicnek semmi sem drága.
For an onlooker/bystander nothing is precious.
Sok kicsi sokra megy.
Many a little becomes much.
Kicsire nem adunk/nézünk, a nagy meg nem számít.
We do not care for the little and the great is of no importance (for us).
Jó kifogás sose rossz.
A good excuse is never bad.
'It is always good to have a good excuse, if it serves the purpose.'
Kit a kígyó megcsíp, a gyíktól is fél.
Whom a serpent has bitten, is afraid of a lizard.
Kígyót-békát kiált rá.
He shouts snake and frog at somebody.
'To abuse somebody right and left.'
Pünkösdi király(ság).
A king(dom) of Whitsuntide.
'A glory/honour of short duration.'
Bujkál bennem a kisördög.
The little devil is hiding in me.
'In spite of what was shown/told me, I have some serious doubts.'
Amit nem kívánsz magadnak, te se tedd embertársadnak.
What you do not wish for yourself, do not do it to your fellow-men either.
A kivétel erősíti a szabályt.
The exception confirms the rule.
Jó a hosszú kolbász és a rövid prédikáció.
Long sausage and short sermon are good.
Szemérmes koldusnak üres a táskája.
A shy beggar has an empty scrip.
Kolumbusz tojása.
It is an egg of Columbus.
'It is a problem very easy to solve.'
Kopár helyen kereskedel.
(Borsót hánysz a falra.)
You (try to) trade at a deserted place.
Kopaszt borotvál.
Borsót hány a falra.
He shaves a bald head.
'A useless action.'
Aki korpa közé keveredik, megeszik a disznók.
He who mixes with the bran, will be eaten by the pigs.
Addig jár a korsó a kútra, míg el nem törik.
The pitcher goes so long to the well, until it breaks.
Kovács kovácsra irigykedik.
One blacksmith envies another.
Nagy kő esett le a szívéről.
A great stone fell down from his heart.
'A sense of relief as a danger or worry was averted.'
Nem mohosodik az a kő meg, melyet gyakran mozgatnak.
A stone moved often gathers no moss.
Ha megdobnak kővel, dobd vissza kenyérrel.
If a stone was thrown at you, throw back some bread in return.
Egy követ fújnak.
They blow one stone.
'They have the same bad intentions.'
Minden követ megmozgat.
He moves all the stones (to achieve something).
Kölcsön kenyér visszajár.
Bread borrowed should be returned.
(Tit for tat.)
Baj van Köpecen.
There is some trouble in Köpec.
'There is something wrong there.'
Köpönyeget fordít.
He turns his coat (according to the wind).
Körmére ég a munka/dolog.
Work is burning down to his nail.
'He is hard pressed for time.'
Ha minden kötél szakad.
If all cords break.
'If the worst comes to the worst.'
Kinek Krisztus a barátja, könnyen üdvözül.
He who is a friend of Christ, will soon find salvation.
Krisztus koporsóját sem őrizték ingyen.
Even Christ's coffin was not guarded for nothing.
Elmehetsz Kukutyinba zabot hegyezni.
You may go to Kukutyin to sharpen oats.
'You are not needed any more, you may/should leave.'
Kaparj kurta, neked is lesz.
Scrape you "short man", and you will also have.
'Making more efforts you will finally gain something.' (Usually a scornful remark.)
A kutya ugat, a karaván halad.
The dog barks but the caravan goes on.
Amelyik kutya ugat, az nem harap.
A dog that barks does not bite.
Egyik kutya, másik eb.
One of them is a dog, the other a "barker".
'They are equally bad.'
Itt van a kutya elásva/eltemetve.
The dog is buried here.
(Here lies the rub.)
Jobb az élő kutya a holt oroszlánnál.
A living dog is better than a dead lion.
Kutya-macska barátság.
Dog and cat friendship.
Leforrázott kutya az esőtől is fél.
A scalded dog fears even the rain.
Nemcsak egy tarka kutya van a világon.
There is not only one pied dog in the world.
Vörös kutya, vörös ló, vörös ember egy se jó.
A red (haired) dog, a red (haired) horse, a red (haired) man - none of them are good.
Kutyából nem lesz szalonna.
Out of a dog there will be no lard.
(A leopard cannot change his spots.)
A mi kutyánk kölyke.
He is the kid of our dog.
'A child of somebody related to the speaker, who was granted - or will be granted - preferential treatment at the expense of outsiders.'
Amely kutyát meg akarnak ölni, veszett nevét költik.
If a dog is to be killed, it is said to be mad.
Kutyaharapást a szőrivel gyógyítják.
The bite of a dog is healed by the hair of it.
Kutyaugatás nem hallatszik a mennybe.
Barking of dogs cannot be heard in heaven.
'Who cares about what he says.'

L


Bal lábbal kelt fel.
He got out of the bed with the left leg.
(To get out of the bed on the wrong side.)
Nehéz láncban táncot járni.
It's hard to dance in chains.
Lányomnak mondom, menyem értsen belőle.
I tell my daughter, my daughter-in-law should understand it.
Rátesz még egy lapáttal.
He adds one more shovelful of it. (It was bad but his action made it even worse.)
Lassan járj, tovább érsz.
Go slowly, you get farther.
A látszat csal.
Appearance cheats.
Legény a gáton.
A lad on the dam.
'He is not frightened/deterred by difficulties.'
Nem az a legény, aki üti, hanem aki állja.
The smart lad is not him who beats, but he who endures it.
Légvárakat épít.
He builds castles in the air.
Két legyet üt egy csapásra.
He kills two flies with one flap.
Mindent lehet, csak akarni kell.
One can do anything, only will is needed.
Nincs lehetetlenség, csak tehetetlenség.
There is no impossibility, only unwillingness/incapacity.
Csak hálni jár bele a lélek.
His soul comes to him only to sleep there.
'He is in very bad health.'
Lesz, ami lesz.
It will be what will be.
(Be as be may.)
Hátra van még a feketeleves.
The black soup is still ahead.
'The worst is still to come.'
Többe kerül a leves, mint a hús.
The soup costs more than the meat.
'The production of something costs more than the value of the product.'
Átesett a ló túlsó oldalára.
He fell to the other side of the horse.
'From one extreme he switched to the opposite extreme.'
Ez egy állatorvosi ló.
This is a 'veterinary horse'.
'It is like the horse in the collection of a veterinary college, demonstrating all conceivable illnesses.'
Ha ló nincs, a szamár is jó.
If there is no horse, a donkey will do as well.
Nagy a feje, búsuljon a ló.
The horse should worry, he has a big head.
'Don't worry!'
A lónak négy lába van, mégis megbotlik.
The horse has four legs, still he stumbles.
Közös lónak túros a háta.
The common horse has scars on his back.
Nyomtató lónak nem kötik be a száját.
The mouth of a treading horse is not muzzled.
Jó/Rossz lóra tesz.
He puts on the right/wrong horse.
'His decision/affiliation is right/wrong.'
A lovak közé dobta a gyeplőt.
He threw the reins between the horses.
'He refused to carry on in a leading position.'
Ki a más ember lovának vermet ás, az önnön lovának nyaka szakad bele.
He who digs a pit for the horse of another man, will find his own horse's neck broken there.
Azt a lovat ütik, amelyik jobban húz.
The horse that draws better is beaten (to draw even more).
A lovát keresi s rajta ül.
He tries to find his horse and is riding it.
Kilóg a lóláb.
The horse's leg protrudes.
(The concealed real intention comes to the open.)
Úgy, lassan készül, mint a Luca széke.
It is made as (or as slowly as) the stool of St. Lucy's day.
Ha már lúd, legyen kövér!
If it is a goose, it should be a fat one.
'Somebody having an unexpected opportunity, makes the best possible use of it.'
Sok lúd disznót győz.
Many geese overpower a pig.

L


Addig dugd be a lyukat, míg kicsi.
Stop up the hole until it's small.
Az egyik lyukat a másikkal tömi/dugja be.
He fills one hole with another.
He pays one debt from another loan.
Lyukat beszél a hasába valakinek.
He talks a hole into the belly of somebody.
(He talks one's head off.)

M


Amit ma megtehetsz, ne halaszd holnapra.
Do not put off till tomorrow what you can do today.
Ma nekem, holnap neked.
Today to me, tomorrow to you.
A macska is szereti a halat, de kerüli a vizet.
The cat also likes fish but keeps away from water.
Alamuszi macska nagyot ugrik.
A sly cat makes a big jump.
Ha nincs otthon a macska, táncolnak/cincognak az egerek.
If the cat's away, the mice will dance/squeak.
Kerülgeti , mint macska a forró kását.
He goes around it like a cat goes around hot mush.
Úgy játszik vele, mint macska az egérrel.
He plays with somebody as a cat plays with a mouse.
Csúnya madár, amelyik a saját fészkébe piszkít.
It is an ugly bird that defiles its own nest.
Madarat tolláról, embert barátjáról.
A bird is recognised by her feathers, a man by his friend.
Ha kell, menj magad, ha nem kell, küldj mást.
If you want something, go yourself, if not, send somebody else.
Magad uram, ha szolgád nincs.
Do it yourself sir, if you have not servant.
Mindenki magából indul ki.
In judging others, the point of departure is always himself.
Aki magasra hág, nagyot esik.
He who climbs high, has a great fall.
Olyan messze van tőle, mint Makó Jeruzsálemtől.
They are as far apart as Makó (in Hungary) is from Jerusalem.
Hol malacot ígérnek, ott zsákkal forgolódjál.
Where pig is proffered, go round with a sack.
Két malomban őrölnek.
They grind in two mills.
'They speak of different things.'
Valakinek a malmára hajtja a vizet.
He drives the water to the mill of somebody.
'By his action - unintentionally - he plays into the hands of somebody.'
Két malomkő közt őrlődik.
He is ground between two millstones.
'He tries to satisfy two incompatible requirements.'
Úgy él, mint Marci Hevesen.
He lives like Marci in Heves.
(He lives like a lord.)
(A)Ki sokat markol, keveset fog.
He who grasps much, retains but little.
Meghalt Mátyás király, oda az igazság.
Kings Matthias is dead, justice is lost.
Ne igyál előre a medve bőrére.
Do not drink (i.e. rejoice) in advance on the hide of a bear (still at large).
Vagy megszokik, vagy megszökik.
Either he gets accustomed or he escapes.
Ami nem megy, nem kell erőltetni.
What fails to succeed, should not be forced.
Meg sem fogtad s már melleszted/kopasztod.
You haven't yet caught the bird, still you are already plucking her.
(Do not count your chicken before they are hatched.)
Bedobták a mélyvízbe.
He was thrown into deep water.
'After a short training he was immediately given a difficult task.'
Túl szép a menyasszony.
The bride is too beautiful.
(This news is too good to be true.)
Aki mer, az nyer.
He who ventures, wins.
Kétszer mérj, egyszer vágj.
Measure twice, cut but once.
Ki minek nem mestere, hóhéra az annak.
He that is not a master of something, is a butcher of it.
Ki-ki maga mesterségét folytassa.
Every man should practise only his trade.
Messziről jött ember azt mond, amit akar.
A man coming from far away tells us what he wants.
(A traveller may lie with authority.)
Elhúzza előtte vagy az orra előtt a mézesmadzagot.
He pulls the honeyed string before him (or before his nose).
(He holds out a carrot to somebody.)
Több is veszett Mohácsnál.
More was lost at Mohács.
'Do not worry, this is not a serious loss/trouble.'
Ha a hegy nem megy Mohamedhez, Mohamed megy a hegyhez.
If the mountain will not go to Mahomet, Mahomet will go to mountain.
Egyet mondok, kettő lesz belőle.
I tell you one thing, two will result from it.
'I have a good idea.'
Olyat mondok, hogy magam is megbánom.
I'll say such things that I'll regret even myself.
A mór megtette a kötelességét, a mór mehet.
The Moor has done his duty, the Moor may go.
Amilyen a mosdó, olyan a törölköző.
Like wash-basin, like towel.
Védi a mundér becsületét.
He defends the honour of the uniform.
'He tries to justify/explain a mistaken/incorrect/unlawful action of somebody in his organisation/group.'
A munka dicséri mesterét.
The works praises its master.
Ég a keze alatt a munka.
Work is burning under his hand.
(He works like fury.)
Elmenne a munka temetésére.
He would attend the funeral of labour.
'He is utterly reluctant to work.'
Hamar munka ritkán jó.
A hasty work is seldom good.
Jó munkához idő kell.
For good work time is needed.
Munka után édes a pihenés.
After work rest is sweet.

N


Aki a nád között ül, olyan sípot csinál, amilyet akar.
He who is sitting in the reeds, makes a whistle of his choice.
Össze kell húzni a nadrágszíjat.
One has to tighten the belt.
Minden nagynak kicsi a kezdete.
Anything big is small at the beginning.
Nincs új a nap alatt.
Nothing is new under the sun.
Több nap, mint kolbász.
There are more days than sausages.
'One has to save for the times ahead.'
Nyugtával dicsérd a napot.
Praise the day (only) at sunset.
A négylábú is botlik.
Even a quadruped stumbles.
Nem enged a negyvennyolcból.
He does not yield from the 48.
Nemakarásnak nyögés a vége.
Unwillingness ends in groaning.
'Unwillingness must lead to failure.'
A könnyű is nehéz a nemakarónak.
Even something light is heavy for the unwilling.
A nép szava Isten szava.
The voice of the people is the voice of God.
Gyáva népnek nincs hazája.
Coward people have no homeland.
Az nevet igazán/legjobban, aki utoljára nevet.
He laughs really/best who laughs last.
Ahol nincs, ott ne keress.
Do not look for something, where it isn't.
Ami nincs, abból nem lehet baj.
What does not exist, cannot cause any trouble.
'It is better to do nothing.'

NY


Aki nyáron nem gyűjt, télen keveset fűt.
He who does not collect in summer, will heat little in winter.
Egy fenékkel/seggel két nyerget nem lehet megülni.
One cannot sit in two saddles having one arse/bottom only.
Az ellőtt nyilat nehéz visszahozni.
An arrow once shot is hard to get back.
(A word once spoken is past recalling.)
Ki két nyulat hajt, egyet se fog.
He who hunts two hares, does not catch even one.
Kiugratja a nyulat a bokorból.
He makes the hare spring out of the bush.
(To make somebody show his true colours.)
Még a nyulat meg sem lőtte, a fazekat már a tűzhöz tette.
He did not shoot the hare but the pot is already on the fire.
Nyulat láttunk, nem lesz szerencsénk.
We have seen a hare, we shall have no luck.
'A superstition.'

O


Más kárán tanul az okos.
Wise men learn by others' harm.
Az okosabb enged.
The wiser gives in.
Olajat önt a tűzre.
He pours oil on the fire.
Annyian/Olyan sokan vannak, mint az oroszok.
They are as many as the Russians.
(There are too many of them.)
Végén csattan az ostor.
The whip cracks at the end.
'The punishment comes at the end.'
or 'The end tries all.'

Ö


Az ökör csak ökör, ha Bécsbe hajtják is.
A ox remains an ox even if driven to Vienna.
(Send a fool to the market (far, to France) and a fool he will return again.)
Könnyű tizenkét ökör után eltolni egy szekeret.
It is easy to push a cart drawn by twelve oxen.
Ökröt a szarván, embert a szaván lehet megfogni.
An ox can be taken by his horn, a man by his word.
Szomjas ökörnek a zavaros víz is jó.
For a thirsty ox dirty water will do as well.
Öndicséret büdös.
Self-praise stinks.
Az ördög nem alszik.
The devil does not sleep.
Az ördög vigyen el!
Let the devil take you!
Fél tőle, mint ördög a szenteltvíztől/tömjéntől.
He is afraid of it, as the devil fears holy water (or incense).
Nem olyan fekete az ördög, mint amilyennek festik.
The devil is not so black as he is painted.
Veri az ördög a feleségét.
The devil is beating his wife.
'If it rains when the sun is shining then it is told that'
Ha ördöggel lakol, ördöggé kell lenned.
Living with a devil, you have to turn a devil.
Add az ördögnek kisujjadat, egészen elkap.
Give the devil your little finger, you will be taken entirely.
Az ördögnek is kell olykor gyertyát gyújtani.
Sometimes one has to light a candle for the devil too.
Tartozott az ördögnek egy úttal.
He owed the devil a journey.
'He made a journey in vain.'
Jó, csak az ördögök rosszak, hogy el nem viszik.
He is good, only the devils are bad, for not carrying him away.
Nem jó az ördögöt a falra festeni.
It is not good to paint the devil on the wall (as he will appear).
Jó az öreg a háznál.
It is good to have an old man at home.
Nincsen öröm üröm nélkül.
There is no joy without sorrow.

P


Otthagyta, mint Szent Pál az oláhokat.
He was left behind like the Wallachians by St. Paul.
'He was left behind unexpectedly.'
A jó pap holtig tanul.
A good priest learns until his death.
A pap se beszél/prédikál kétszer.
Not even the priest will speak/preach twice.
Kinek a pap, kinek a papné (nekem a lánya).
One likes the priest, someone else his wife (I prefer his daughter).
A papír türelmes.
Paper is patient.
Nem minden/mindig papsajt.
It is not all/always mallow.
(Life is not all beer and skittles.)
Verekedő pásztorok közt jó dolga van a farkasnak.
If the shepherds fight each other, the wolf has a good time.
Hosszabb a péntek, mint a szombat.
Friday is longer than Saturday.
'The underskirt is longer than the skirt.'
Kis pénz, kis foci.
Little money - little football.
'If little money is paid, then only little work can be expected.'
Pénz beszél, kutya ugat.
Money talks, although the dog may bark.
Rossz pénz nem vész el.
Bad money is never lost.
(A bad penny always turns up.)
A pénznek nincs szaga.
Money has no smell.
Ismerik, mint a rossz pénzt.
He is well known as bad money.
Úgy került bele, mint Pilátus a krédóba.
He got into this affair like Pilate into the Credo (i. e. by mere chance).
A pokol országútja is jó szándékkal van kikövezve.
Even the highway leading to Hell is paved with good intentions.
Elszabadult a pokol.
Hell has been broken loose.
Pokolban is esik egyszer egy ünnep.
There is a feast once even in Hell.
Felteszi az i-re a pontot.
He puts the dot on the i.
'He makes the last move in the completion of something.'
A pontosság a királyok udvariassága.
Punctuality is the politeness of kings.
Senki sem próféta a saját, maga hazájában.
Nobody is a prophet in his own country.
Fogadatlan prókátornak (eb)szar a fizetése.
An unwanted helper gets (dog's) droppings as payment.
A puding próbája az, hogy megeszik.
The proof of the pudding is eating it.
Ez csak púp a hátunkon.
This is but a hump on our backs.
'We would be pleased to get rid of this.'

R


Rend a lelke mindennek.
Order is the soul of everything.
Rendnek muszáj lenni.
There must be order.
A rest kétszer fárad.
A lazy man works twice.
A retek reggel méreg, délben étek, este orvosság.
Radish is poison in the morning, food at noon and medicine in the evening.
Amit nyer a réven, elveszti a vámon.
What he gains at the toll, loses at the customs.
Alvó róka nem fog nyulat/csirkét.
A sleeping fox catches no hare/chicken.
Egy rókáról két bőrt nem lehet lehúzni.
One cannot strip two hides from one fox.
Minden út Rómába vezet.
All roads lead to Rome.
Könnyebb rontani, mint építeni.
It is easier to destroy than to build.
Rossz a rosszal, de rosszabb a rossz nélkül.
It is bad with the bad (i. e. the wife), but it is worse without the bad.
Minél rosszabb, annál jobb.
The worse it is (in one respect), the better (in another respect).
Nincsen rózsa tövis nélkül.
No rose without a thorn.
Nem a ruha teszi az embert.
Clothes do not make the man.
Ruha teszi az embert.
Clothes make the man.

S


Megállja a sarat.
He stands the mud.
'He comes up to mark. - He stands the test.'
Felszedi a sátorfáját.
He dismounts the tent-poles.
'He makes off.'
Ha begyógyul is a seb, megmarad a helye.
Even if the wound is healed, the scar of it remains.
Könnyű sebet ejteni, de nehéz gyógyítani.
It is easy to inflict a wound, but difficult to heal it.
A semminél a kevés is többet ér.
Even a little is more than nothing.
Nesze semmi, fogd meg jól.
Here is nothing, hold it tight.
'Somebody was given much less than expected.'
Semmiből nem lesz semmi.
Out of nothing there will be nothing.
Új seprű jól seper.
A new broom sweeps well.
Aki siet, elkésik.
He that hurries will be late.
Simon bíró hajtja a lovat.
Headman Simon drives the horse.
'The woman rules the house.'
Fél lábbal a sírban van.
He has already one foot in the grave.
Megfordul/Forog a sírjában.
He turns/spins in his grave.
Sóbálvánnyá változott.
He became in idol of salt.
(A pillar of salt.)
Úgy még sohasem volt, hogy valahogy ne lett volna.
It has never been so, that it wouldn't have been anyhow.
Mehet a sóhivatalba.
He may go to the salt-office.
'His case will not be heard anywhere.'
Ki sokba kap, keveset végez.
He who begins many things, finished but few.
A sólyommadárnak nem lesz galamb fia.
A falcon will not breed a dove.
A sorok között olvas.
He reads between the lines.
Kilóg a sorból.
He sticks out of the line.
(He steps out of the line.)
Feltalálta/Felfedezte a spanyolviaszt.
He has discovered the sealing wax.
'He made an invention done by others long ago.'
Átveszi/Átadja a stafétabotot.
He takes/hands over the baton.
'He takes/hands over a job from to his predecessor/successor.'
Suba subához, guba gubához.
Sheepskin coat to sheepskin coat, (shepherd's) cloth coat to cloth coat.
'Marry your equal.'
Elveti a sulykot.
He throws the beater too far.
(He throws the hatchet.)
Suszter maradjon a kaptafánál!
Let the shoemaker remain at his last!
Süketek párbeszéde folyik.
There is a dialogue between deaf people.
'Each tells his own views without regard to that of the other.'

SZ


A szabadság drágább az aranynál.
Liberty is dearer than gold.
Nincs szabály kivétel nélkül.
There is no rule without exception.
Akkora a szája, mint a Bécsi kapu.
His mouth is as big as the Vienna Gate (in Buda).
Ne szólj szám, nem fáj fejem!
Don't speak my mouth, I shall have no headache.
Sok szakács elsózza a levest (az ételt).
Many cooks put too much salt in the soup/food.
Szálka valakinek a szemében.
It is a splinter in the eye of somebody.
(A thorn in the flesh.)
Adj a tótnak szállást, kiver a házból.
Give lodgement to a Slovak and you will be beaten out of your home.
A fuldokló ember a szalmaszálhoz is kap.
A drowning man catches even at a stalk of straw.
Egy szalmaszálat sem tesz keresztbe.
He does not put crosswise even one stalk of straw.
'He is utterly lazy/disinterested in this matter.'
Áll, mint szamár a hegyen.
He stands there like a donkey on the hill.
'He is idle/undecided what to do.'
Eltűnt, mint szürke szamár a ködben.
He disappeared like a grey donkey in the fog.
Szamárbőgés/Ebugatás nem hallatszik a mennybe/az égbe.
Braying of an ass (or barking of a dog), is not heard in Heaven.
Nem kell keverni a szart (mert még büdösebb lesz).
One should not stir the shit (as it will be even more stinking).
Csörög a szarka, vendég jön.
The magpie rattles, a guest will come.
Sokat akar a szarka, de nem bírja a farka.
The magpie wants too much, but her tail is unable to carry it.
'He overestimates his power/capacity/strength.'
Eltalálta szarva közt a tőgyét.
He has hit the udder between the horns.
'He has made a bad mistake.'
Szeget szeggel.
Nail by/with nail.
(One nail drives out another.)
A szegény embert még az ág is húzza.
A poor man is pulled even by the branch of a tree.
Szegény ember vízzel főz.
A poor man cooks with water.
Szegénynek a szerencséje is szegény.
Even the luck of a poor man is poor.
Két szék közt a pad alá esik.
Between two chairs he falls below the bench.
Akinek a szekerén ülsz, annak a nótáját fújjad.
Sing the song of the man whose cart you sit on.
Kifelé áll a szekere rúdja.
The pole of his cart is pointing outwards.
(He is about to get the sack.)
Ne fuss olyan szekér után, amelyik nem vesz fel.
Do not run after a cart that will not take you.
Nincs oly rakott szekér, melyre még egy villával ne férne.
There is no loaded cart which could not carry one more forkful (of hay).
Aki szelet vet, vihart arat.
He who sows wind, reaps whirlwind.
Kifogja a szelet a vitorlájából.
He takes the wind out of someone's sails.
Széllel szembeszállni nem lehet.
One cannot fight the wind.
Forog, mint a szélkakas.
He turns like a weathercock.
Kiengedte/Kiszabadította a palackból a szellemet.
He released the spirit from the bottle.
Szélmalomharcot vív.
He fights windmills.
Több szem többet lát.
Several eyes see more.
Amit a szeme meglát, a keze nem hagyja ott.
What is noticed by his eyes, will not be left there by his hands.
Szép a szeme, de ördög a szíve.
His eyes are beautiful, but his heart is a devil.
Úgy vigyáz rá, mint a szeme fényére/világára.
He guards it/him like his eyesight.
Más szemében a szálkát is meglátja, a magáéban a gerendát sem.
(He can see the splinter in another's eye but cannot see even the beam in his own.)
Egyik szemem sír, a másik meg nevet.
One of my eyes sheds tears, the other one laughs.
Szemesnek áll a világ.
The world stands to those who have eyes.
'To the open eyes the world yields anything.'
Szemet szemért, fogat fogért.
An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.
Kiszúrja valakinek a szemét valamivel.
He puts out the eye of somebody with something.
'He gives something of much less value than requested/needed/promised.'
Többet hiszünk a szemnek, mint a fülnek.
More credit is given to the eyes than to the ears.
Szemtelen, mint a piaci légy.
He is as impertinent as a fly at the market.
Rendben van a szénája.
His hay is in order.
'Everything is all right about him.'
Minden szentnek maga felé hajlik a keze.
The hand of each saint inclines towards himself.
Kiteregeti a szennyest.
He hangs out the dirty linen (to the public).
A szerelem vak.
Love is blind.
Mindenki a maga szerencséjének kovácsa.
Everyone is the blacksmith of his own fortune.
Jó szerszám, fele munka.
Goo tool means half the work.
Új szita szegen függ (aztán az ágy alá kerül).
A new sieve is on a nail (then it gets under the bed).
Ami a szívén, az a száján/nyelvén.
What is on his heart, that is on his mouth/tongue.
A szép szó az ellenséget is kibékíti.
Nice words appease even the enemy.
(Mondott) Szóból ért az ember.
Only words that have been told can be understood.
Száz szónak is egy a vége.
Even one hundred words lead to one end.
Szép a szava, de ördög ő maga (az eha [mája]).
His words are nice but he is a devil (his liver is that of a devil).
Egy a szoba a kemencével.
"A férj és a feleség egyaránt felelős közös dolgaikért."
The room and the stove are one item.
'Man and wife share the same responsibilities.'
A szomszéd rétje mindig zöldebb.
The neighbour's meadow is always greener.
Jobb a jó szomszéd sok rossz atyafinál.
A good neighbour is better than many bad kinsmen.
Kibújik a szög a zsákból.
The nail sticks out of the sack.
'One's real intention/purpose comes to the open.'
Szöget ütött a fejébe.
It hit a nail into his head.
'It set him thinking.'
Savanyú a szőlő.
The grape is sour.
A szőnyeg alá söpri a kérdést/problémát.
He sweeps the problem under the carpet.
A szúnyogból is elefántot csinál.
He makes an elephant out of a mosquito.
A szükségből erényt kovácsol/csinál.
He forges/makes a virtue of necessity.
Ahol nagy a szükség, közel a segítség.
Where need is great, help is nearby.
Szükség törvényt bont.
Necessity breaks the law.
Nehéz szülés volt.
It was a difficult childbirth.
'It was very difficult to achieve it e. g. in a discussion.'
Kitették a szűrét.
His cloak was put out.
(He got the sack.)

T


Addig nyújtózz, ameddig a takaród ér.
Stretch yourself as far as your cover reaches.
Tál, kanál nem lehet csördületlen.
Dish and spoon cannot be without jingling.
'It is natural to have some disagreement between man and wife.'
Lefelé tapos és felfelé hajlong.
He treads downwards [on his subordinates] and bows upwards [before his superiors].
Sötétben minden tehén fekete.
All cows are black in the dark.
A nagy teher is könnyű, ha sokan emelik.
Even a heavy burden is light if lifted by many.
Korán meglátszik, mely tejből lesz jó túró.
It will soon show which milk will yield a good curd.
'A child's character and abilities become evident soon.'
Nem fenékig tejföl.
It is not all sour cream down to the bottom.
'It is not all as good as it seems to be.'
(Not all beer and skittles.)
Szegény, mint a templom egere.
He is as poor as a church mouse.
A tények makacs dolgok.
Facts are stubborn things.
Tévedni emberi dolog.
To err is human.
Ami tiéd, tedd el, a másét ne vedd el.
Take what is yours, [but] not that of others.
Tanulj tinó, ökör lesz belőled.
Learn steer, you will turn an ox.
'Keep studying hard, so that you may get on in life.'
A tisztaság fél egészség.
Cleanliness is half-health.
Egyik tizenkilenc, a másik egy híján húsz.
One of them is nineteen, the other is one less than twenty.
'They are equally bad.'
Idegen tollakkal ékeskedik.
He boasts with foreign feathers.
A nagy tolvaj leszakad, de a kicsi felakad.
The great thief escapes (the gallow), the small one hangs.
Jobb a torkát metszette volna meg a bába, mikor köldökét metszette meg.
The midwife should have cut his throat rather than his navel.
Azt se tudja tök-e vagy túrós étek.
(Azt se tudja, eszik-e vagy isszák.)
He does not even know whether it is a pumpkin or a curd-cake.
'He has no idea about it.'
Olyan, mintha tökre hánynál bojtorjánt.
(Borsót hány a falra.)
It is like throwing bur on a gourd.
'A vain effort.'
Szél a tölgyet ledönti, de a náddal nem bír.
The wind fells the oak, but cannot cope with the reed.
Bedobta a törölközőt.
He threw in the towel.
(He gave up the effort.)
Tréfából is lehet igazat mondani.
Truth may be told in a joke too.
A tudás hatalom.
Knowledge is power.
A türelem rózsát terem.
Patience brings roses.
(All things come to those who wait.)
Két tűz között van.
He is between two fires.
Aki közel van a tűzhöz, az jobban melegszik.
He who is close to the fire, will get warm best.
A tűzzel nem jó játszani.
It is not good to play with the fire.
Tűzoltó munkát végez.
He is doing a fireman's work.
'He is compelled to do something quickly, without proper preparation and consideration.'

TY


Amelyik tyúk sokat kotkodácsol, keveset tojik.
A hen that cackles much lays only a few eggs.
Annyit ért hozzá, mint tyúk az ábécéhez.
He knows as much about it as a hen does about the alphabet.
Az igazságot a tyúk is kikaparja.
Truth is scraped out even by a hen.
Vak tyúk is talál szemet.
Even a blind hen can find a grain.
Nem tart egy tyúkmonysültig (tojássültig).
It will not last longer than frying an egg.

M


Máma egy ujjal, holnap tíz körömmel.
Today (it is enough to do it) by one finger, tomorrow (it will be necessary) by ten nails.
Az ujjunk sem egyforma.
Even our fingers are not equal.
Aki urával pöröl, Isten annak orvosa.
"Régen rossz annak, aki feljebbvalójával vitába száll."
God is the doctor of the man who quarrels with his master.
Az úr a pokolban is úr.
A master is a master in hell as well.
Urak kérése parancsolat.
A master's request is a command.
Nem jó nagy urakkal egy tálból cseresznyézni.
It is not good to eat cherries from the same dish with persons of high rank.
Nem lehet (Nehéz) két úrnak szolgálni.
One cannot (It is difficult to) serve two masters.
Adj Uramisten, de rögtön!
Give me, my Lord, but do it immediately.
'An urgent request.'
Fel is út, le is út.
There is a way upwards and downwards too.
'Leave immediately.'
Legjobb az egyenes út.
The straight (i. e. honest) road is the best.
Járt utat a járatlanért el ne hagyd!
Don't leave the betrodden way for the untrodden one.
Megjárta a damaszkuszi utat.
He has passed the road to Damascus.
'He has changed his conviction or allegiance.'
Zöld utat kap.
He gets green way.
(He gets green light.)

V


Ebül szerzett vagyon ebül vész el.
Property gained unlawfully will be lost in the same way.
Akinek vaj van a fején, ne menjen a napra.
He who has butter on his head, should not go to the sun.
Vak vezet világtalant.
A blind leads a sightless.
A vakok közt félszemű a király.
Among the blind the one-eyed is the king.
Jobb valami, mint semmi.
Something is better than nothing.
Valamit valamiért.
Something for something.
(Tit for tat.)
Hadd morogjon Varga Pál, csak jó sarut varrjon.
Let the cobbler Paul grumble, he should only make good sandals.
Varga, ne tovább a kaptafánál.
Cobbler, do not go beyond the last.
Aki varjat akar lőni, nem pengeti íját.
He who wants to shoot at a crow, will not pluck his bow.
Ezer varjú ellen elég egy kő.
Against a thousand crows one stone is enough.
Láttam én már karón varjút.
I have already seen a crow on a pole.
'I do not believe this boasting/exaggeration/menace.'
Varjú a varjúnak nem vágja ki a szemét.
A crow does not pick out the crow's eye.
Addig üsd a vasat, míg meleg.
Strike the iron while it is warm.
Két/Több vasat tart a tűzben.
He keeps two/several irons in the fire.
Kettőn áll a vásár.
The agreement depends on two persons.
A könnyebb végét fogja a dolognak.
He seizes the lighter end of the matter.
Nem rejti véka alá a véleményét.
He does not hide his opinion under a bushel.
Ha akarom vemhes, ha akarom, nem vemhes.
If I say, it is pregnant, if I do not say, it is not pregnant.
'It depends on me whether I decide this or another way.'
or 'I cannot see any good reason for deciding this or that way either'.
Akármilyen kedves vendég, három napig untig elég.
Even the most welcome guest is more than enough for three days.
Harmadnapi vendégnek ajtó megett a helye.
After three days the palace of the guest is behind the door (i. e. outside).
Hívatlan vendégnek ajtó megett helye.
The place of an unbidden guest is behind the door.
A vér nem válik vízzé.
Blood will not turn water.
A verebek is csiripelik.
Even the sparrows chirp it.
'It is an open secret.'
Jobb ma egy veréb, mint holnap egy túzok.
Better a sparrow today than a bustard tomorrow.
Aki másnak vermet ás, maga esik bele.
He who digs a pit for others, falls into it himself.
Vert viszen veretlent.
A beaten one carries an unbeaten.
'The innocent has to suffer for the crime of a wrong-doer.'
Ki mint vet, úgy arat.
As one sows, so he reaps.
Vihar egy pohár vízben.
A storm in a glass of water.
Ha megcsordul Vince, tele lesz a pince.
If Vincent begins to flow, then the cellar will be full.
'If the thaw sets in on Vincent day, then there will be much wine in the autumn.'
Lassú víz partot mos.
Slow water washes away the bank.
(Nem) Olyan, mint a teknőben ingó víz.
([Nem] köpönyegforgató.)
He is (not) like water shaking in a wash tub.
'He is (not) turning his coat according to the wind.'
Sok víz lefolyik még addig a Dunán.
Much water will flow in the Danube until then.
'It is still far away.'
Sok víz lefolyt azóta a Dunán.
Much water has run in the Danube since then.
'It happened long ago.'
Vizet prédikál és bort iszik.
He preaches water and drinks wine.
A hideg vízre valót sem keresné meg.
He could not earn enough to buy even cold water.
'If really efficient work were requested, then his work would not earn him cold water.'
Aki fél a víztől, nem eszik halat.
He that is afraid of water, will not eat fish.

Z, ZS


A zavarosban halászik.
He fishes in troubled waters.
Megtalálta zsák a foltját.
The sack has found its patch.
'People of the same similar ideas have found each other.'
Zsákbamacskát árul/vesz.
'He sells/buys a cat in a poke.'
